sini /C20sa male /C20sevi /C19c
Wars that Make States and Wars
that Make Nations: Organised Violence,
Nationalism and State Formation in the Balkans
Abstract
Since the beginning of the19th century the Balkans has been a synonym for aggressive
nationalism and unbridled violence; the twophenomena traditionally understood to be
the key obstacles for its social development. This paper contests such views by arguing
that it was the absence of protracted warfare and coherent nationalist doctrines that
distinguishes the history of South Easte rn Europe from the rest of the continent.
Drawing critically on bellicosehistorical sociology and modernist theories of nationalism -
with a spotlight on the work of Charles Tilly and Ernest Gellner. Drawing critically on
bellicose historical sociology and modernists theories of nationalism the paper makes
a case that it was not the abundance of nationalism and organised violence but rather
their historical scarcity that proved decisive for the slow pace of social development in
the Balkans.
Keywords: Nation; Nationalism; States; War; Balkans.
T HERE is NOTHING INHERENTLY VIOLENT in na-
tionalist ideology. As the Catalan and Quebecois cases on the one hand
and the Basque and Chechen on the other clearly demonstrate, there
are ‘‘nationalisms that bark and nationalisms that bite’’ (Beissinger
1998). Nevertheless it seems that in some parts of the world nationalism
is exclusively identiﬁed with bellicosity . The popular perceptions of the
Balkans
1 are of a region prone to rampant nationalism and incessant
violence. Such a stance was already present in the early 19th century
when the image of the Balkans gradually replaced that of the Ottoman
Empire as the chaotic and uncivilised Other. While the wars of
1 In this paper the Balkans are understood
as the region that occupies territory of the
following seven states: Serbia, Greece,
Bulgaria, Macedonia, Albania, Montenegro,
and Bosnia and Herzegovina. In addition I
make sporadic reference to the areas cur-
rently belonging to the three independent
states whose territories are largely outside
of the Balkan Peninsula: Romania, Croatia
and Turkey.
31
Sini/C20sa MALE/C20SEVI/C19C, School of Sociology University College, Dublin [sinisa.malesevic
@ucd.ie].
Arch.europ.sociol.,LIII, 1 (2012), pp. 31–63— 0003-9756/12/0000-900$07.50per art + $ 0.10 per pageªA.E.S.,
2012
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003975612000021 Published online by Cambridge University Pressindependence against the crumbling ‘‘sick man of Europe’’ were
generally greeted with enthusiasm in the West, the attempts by the
newly independent Balkan states to establish genuine autonomy from the
Great Powers at the end of the 19th and early 20th century provoked
profound animosity in the major European capitals. This view is best
illustrated by the Evening Post’s depiction of Serbia following the
assassination of King Aleksandar Obrenovi/C19ci n 1903:
Servia, the land of assassinations, abdications, pronunciamientos, and coups
d’/C19Etat, has surpassed itself and caused all previous achievements to pale into
insigniﬁcance beside the tragedy enacted between midnight and the small hours
of this morning at Belgrade. A central Asian khanate, a not European city , would
be a ﬁtting theatre for such ruthless and accurately planed regicide ( Evening
Post, 1903,p . 13).
Interestingly enough such perceptions of the region were often
shared by the inhabitants of the Balkan Peninsula, and in particular
the intellectuals, who were just as much prone to auto-stereotyping
and perceiving their region as intrinsically violent, ethnocentric,
barbaric and characterised by a distinct ‘‘Balkan mentality’’ (Cviji /C19c,
1922; Dvornikovi/C19c 1939).
This alleged ubiquitous violence and entrenched nationalism are
often singled out as the principal causes for the region’s economic and
political backwardness (Berend2003; Gerolymatos 2002). For example,
in his 1993 introduction to the reprinted Carnegie Endowment report
on the Balkan Wars of 1912-13 George Kennan directly links the
violent conﬂicts in the region at the beginning and at the end of 20
th
century arguing that the lack of development in the Balkans was not
rooted in religious differences but in ‘‘aggressive nationalism [ .]
[which] manifested itself on the ﬁeld of battle, drew on deeper traits
of character inherited, presumably , from the distant tribal past [.]a n d
so it remains today’’ (Kennan1993,p p .4-6).
This paper challenges both of these popular perceptions. Firstly I
argue that when compared to the rest of the European continent,
South East Europe has experienced less organised violence and signif-
icantly less nationalism for much of its history. Secondly and more
importantly it was the absence of coherent, popular nationalist ideologies
and protracted inter-state warfare that have often proved to be a crucial
hindrance for intensive social development in this part of Europe. The
core argument combines theoretical and empirical aspects. The ﬁrst
section engages with the bellicose tradition in historical sociology that
sees the state as a direct product of warfare and it questions the
blanket proposition that ‘wars make states’ in the context of South East
32
sini/C20sa male /C20sevi/C19c
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003975612000021 Published online by Cambridge University PressEuropean history . I argue that the c onventional bellicose argument
requires a serious qualiﬁcation as it seems unable to explain persistent
weakness of the state in the 19th and early 20th century Balkans. The
second section focuses on the relationship between organised violence,
state formation and nationalism. It attempts to rehabilitate the classical
modernist theories of nationalism, and in particular Gellner’s approach,
which are often criticised for not being able to account for the alleged
emergence of nationalist aspirations in the early19
th century Balkans. In
contrast to the mainstream Balkan historiography , I argue that there was
very little if any nationalism in South East Europe for much of the19th
century and for large sections of population nationalism was a marginal
ideology well into the 20th century .
South East Europe and the Bellicose Historical Sociology
The idea that wars make states has a long tradition in social sciences,
expressed by numerous theorists: from Gumplowitz (1899), Ratzenhofer
(1881), Ward ( 1913), Oppenheimer ( 1926), Hintze ( 1975 [1908]) and
R€ustow (1980 [1950]) to the more recent theories of Carneiro ( 1977),
Downing (1992)E r t m a n(1997)a n dG a t(2006). This bellicose historical
sociology gained momentum with Tilly’s (1975, 1985, 1992)s o p h i s t i -
cated reformulation which emphasised the broader geo-political context
in the changing character of imperial inter-state warfare in early
modern Europe. For Tilly protracted wars were the principal catalyst
of state transformation as they ultimately enabled the development of
the omnipotent bureaucratic apparatuses, effective revenue systems,
state wide juridical control, integrated regional administration and
substantially better ﬁnancial infrastructure. Furthermore, the con-
stant war-making increased demand for greater military and economic
mobilisation of ordinary people whose material resources and military
participation became decisive for the long term survival of warring
states. The unintended consequence of these changes were gradual but
steady payoffs that the state rulers had to make to their subjects
including wider citizenship rights, expanding parliamentary systems,
religious freedoms, and social protection, all of which also encouraged
the development of civil societies.
The west European multi-polar order prevented the emergence of a
single empire, thus creating a semi-anarchic environment where rulers
were gradually forced to rely on the broader sectors of the population
under their control. Hence to effectively ﬁght external threat rulers often
33
wars, states, nations
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003975612000021 Published online by Cambridge University Pressembarked on pre-emptive wars while simultaneously trying to neutralise
domestic forms of violence. To ﬁnance ever-more-costly warfare in the
context of rapid military transformations (with the invention and mass
manufacturing of more destructive weaponry and dramatic improve-
ments in transport and communication systems) rulers had to constantly
increase resource extraction and introduce universal conscription in the
territories under their control. As Tilly (1985,p . 172) emphasises, this
process was highly contingent with states emerging as a corollary of war
making, extraction of resources andcapital accumulation. In other words
to extract money , people and material it was necessary to subdue and
disarm internal rivals and defeat external foes. In this process state rulers
operated in a similar way to gangs who offer security in exchange for
regular ﬁnancial payment. That is, the state developed as an institution-
alised and legitimised large scale protection racket:
Governments’ provision of protection. often qualiﬁes as racketeering. To the
extent that the threats against which a given government protects its citizens are
imaginary or are consequences of its own activities, the government has
organised a protection racket. Since governments themselves commonly simu-
late, stimulate, or even fabricate threats of external war and since the repressive
and extractive activities of government often constitute the largest current
threats to the livelihoods of their own citizens, many governments operate
essentially the same ways as racketeers (Tilly 1985,p . 171).
Therefore, the bellicose tradition argues, the modern centralised
political entities that successfully claim monopoly on the use of
violence over their territory , which we call nation-states, were a direct
by-product of the intensiﬁcation in west European war-making from
the 16
th century onwards.
This bellicose interpretation has provoked a great deal of attention:
it has been applied to various parts of the world with a focus on the
structural differences between Western Europe and the rest of the world.
For example, Lustick ( 1997) interprets state instability in the Middle
East through the prism of earlier state development in Europe whereby
better organised and more powerful European states colonised the region
and in this way averted the emergence of ‘state-building wars’ in the
Middle East. Barnett (1992) provides a comparative analysis of Israel and
Egypt arguing that the relationship between war and state-making is
highly dependent on the different strategies of state building pursued by
the rulers in the two countries. In contrast, Tin-Bor Hui ( 2005)
pinpoints striking similarities between China in the Spring and Autumn
and Warring States periods (656-221 BCE) with early modern Europe:
whereas both regions experienced the proliferation of warfare,
34
sini/C20sa male /C20sevi/C19c
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003975612000021 Published online by Cambridge University Pressdevelopment of centralised bureau cracy and expansion of trade they
nevertheless eventually experien ced different outcomes. Taylor and
Botea (2008) contrast the impact of war on state development in Vietnam
and Afghanistan arguing that the relative ethnic homogeneity was
a decisive factor contributing to a state making war in Vietnam and
a state destroying war in Afghanistan. Centeno (2002) and Herbst (2000)
have compared the experience of state formation in early modern Western
Europe with that of Latin America and Africa respectively, pointing to
different organisational trajectories in these two continents where, in
contrast to West European protracted wars and strong states, sporadic
and limited warfare generated weak and internally polarised states.
The general tendency among scholars is either to endorse or
disprove the ‘‘war makes states’’ thesis. Some authors such as Thies
(2007), Ayoob (1995) and Herbst (2000) side with Tilly in the argument
that the proliferation of protracted inter-state warfare is conducive to
the development of pervasive state apparatuses in other parts of the
world such as the Middle East, Africa, or South Asia. Others (Leander
2004,R e n o ,2003,K a l d o r2001) have tended to be much more critical
of this assumption arguing that the historical context has signiﬁcantly
changed: in the post WWII international system all attempts at
unilateral border change are rapidly delegitimised which creates
a situation where inter-state warfare is on the wane while intra-state
(civil) wars, conﬂicts that destroy state capacity , proliferate.
The Balkan case remains something of a puzzle as it does not easily
ﬁt into either of the two competing perspectives. At ﬁrst glance it
might seem that the South East European experience quickly refutes
the bellicose thesis as the common perception of the region is one of
relentless civil warfare and weak states. However careful historical
sociological analysis shows otherwise: for much of its history the
Balkans have not experienced more violence than other parts of
Europe. The rulers of the medieval kingdoms of Serbia, Croatia,
Bosnia, and Bulgaria waged frequent wars with the Byzantine Empire
and between each other but in terms of intensity, human casualties and
their organisational features, these wars were no different from other
medieval conﬂicts fought in the same period throughout the European
continent (Nicholson 2004; Keen 1999: Fine 1994). Just as all wars in
the feudal age, these conﬂicts were essentially small scale, low casualty
ritualistic affairs with very few proper and lasting battleﬁelds. ‘‘As the
knights represented the core of all mediaeval forces, armies were quite
small and expensive while direct battles were generally avoided
whenever possible making regular warfare no more than plundering
35
wars, states, nations
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003975612000021 Published online by Cambridge University Pressexpeditions’’ (Male/C20sevi/C19c 2010,p . 107). Once the Ottoman Empire
conquered much of South East Europe the entire region was
successfully paciﬁed for centuries. While some areas in the Balkans
were sites of inter-imperial wars between Ottomans, Habsburgs,
Venetians and the Russian Empire
2 for much of the three centuries
(16th-18th) this region has nevertheless experienced substantially less
organised violence than other parts of Europe. With the gradual
weakening of the Ottoman Empire in the early 19
th century the
Balkans became a zone of interest for the so called Great Powers
whose political and cultural elite encouraged violent resistance to
Ottoman rule. From Chateaubriand and Flaubert to Lord Byron,
Shelley and Goethe South East Europe and Greece in particular were
suddenly rediscovered as the exotic cradle of European civilization
(Todorova 1997,p p . 89-115).
3 It is only in this period that one can
witness the acceleration of organised violence in the region. Neverthe-
less, this is hardly unique for the Balkans as scientiﬁc, technological
and organisational developments made 19
th century warfare much
more deadly all over the world: for example, the global war casualties
for the combined 16th and 17th centuries amounted to less than
8 million whereas this ﬁgure of war deaths jumps to over 19 million
for the 19th century alone (Eckhardt 1992,p p .272-273).
In this context the organised violence in the Balkans appears
miniscule when compared to the intensity and scale of destruction
and human casualties resulting from wars, revolutions, uprisings and
industrial conﬂicts in the large and powerful European states. For
example while the French and British polities were ﬁghting wars,
colonising the globe and dealing violently with various revolutions and
numerous uprisings throughout the 19
th century – with Britain in-
volved in more than sixty major wars – during the same period South
East Europe experienced only six violent conﬂicts and ﬁve major
(peasant) rebellions (Clodfelter 1992) (see table at the end of the text).
Furthermore, while at the beginning of the 19
th century much of
Europe was engulfed in the extremely destructive Napoleonic Wars
2 The only substantial conﬂicts occurred in
the late 17th and early to mid- 18th centuries.
These include the Ottoman-Venetian wars over
Peloponnesus, the Austrian-Ottoman wars in
the 1710sa n d 1730s in Bosnia and Serbia and
the Russian-Ottoman wars that concluded
with the Treaty of Kuchuk Kaynarca ( 1774)
(Zarinebaf et al. 2005).
3 However this sudden obsession with the
Balkans was not very deep: ‘‘‘They loved the
Greece of their dreams; the land, the lan-
guage, the antiquities, but not the people. If
only, they thought, the people could be more
like the British scholars and gentlemen; or
failing that, as too much to be hoped, if only
they were more like their own ancestors; or
better still, if only they were not there at all’’
(Woodhouse 1969 ,p p .38-39).
36
sini/C20sa male /C20sevi/C19c
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003975612000021 Published online by Cambridge University Presswith casualties totalling no less than six million, the Balkan uprisings of
the same period amounted to a few thousand casualties (Clodfelter1992,
p. 322, Biondich 2011). With the clear exception of the Greek War of
Independence (1821-9)a l lt h e19th century Balkan wars and uprisings
were small scale conﬂicts involving several thousand casualties.
Nonetheless the Greek War of Independence was far from being
a domestic Balkan affair. It was fostered and supported by the Great
Powers and it was their military , economic and political involvement
that sealed ‘‘Greek’’ victory as not a single Greek soldier took part in
the battles (such as that of Navarino, 1827) that decided the fate of the
war. The large casualty rate was primarily a product of highly disorgan-
ised inﬁghting among the supposedly uniﬁed and ‘‘nationally conscious’’
Greeks and the civilian massacres by various brigand forces (Roudometof
2001; Mazower 2000).
Early 20
th century warfare was signiﬁcantly more destructive with
two Balkan wars ( 1912-13 and 1913), World War I and the Greco-
Turkish war of 1919-22 deﬁning the character of organised violence in
South East Europe for this period. The 1912-13 Balkan wars were
particularly important as their scale, intensity and outcome had a pro-
found impact on the perception of the region in the West. Although the
massacres of the Greek War of independence dented the until then
popular view of the Balkans as a land of ‘‘noble savage Christians’’ who
needed to be saved from the ‘‘Turkish yoke’’ and brought back to their
ancient Greek heritage, it was really the unexpected context of the
Balkan wars that completely changed popular perceptions of the region
in the West. As Todorova (1997,p p .122-139) convincingly argues, and
demonstrates, ‘‘violence as the leitmotiv of the Balkans was strictly
speaking, a post-Balkan wars phenomenon’’. Whereas the start of the
First Balkan War was still largely interpreted in Western media through
the prism of liberation from the Ottomans (as it involved organised
alliance of the small Balkan states against the Ottoman Empire) the
swift and comprehensive military victory of the Balkan League changed
this perception.
4
The outbreak of the Second Balkan War with the former allies now
ﬁghting each other over the former Ottoman possessions provoked
4 For example the Commission set up by
the Carnegie Endowment for International
Peace to identify the cases of the two Balkan
wars differentiated strongly between the two
wars: the ﬁrst conﬂict was depicted as ‘‘the
supreme protest against violence [ .]t h e
protest of the weak against the strong [ .]
and for this reason it was glorious and
popular throughout the civilised world’’
whereas the second conﬂict was deﬁned as
a rapacious war where ‘‘both victor and
vanquished lose morally and materially’’
(Todorova 1997 ,p . 4).
37
wars, states, nations
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003975612000021 Published online by Cambridge University Pressoutrage in the capitals of the Great Powers. The fact that for the ﬁrst
time in modern history the political elites of the small Balkan polities
were in a position to pursue their own geo-political interests and in
this process largely ignore the wishes of the Great powers infuriated
the political establishment in the major European capitals. In addi-
tion, the unprecedented scale of the conﬂict came as a shock to most
external observers. The armies of the Balkan states were well equipped
with modern weaponry , well trained in the most recent military
doctrines and strategies, relying heavily ‘‘on the ideas of the French
Colonel Louis de Grandmaison to carry out the attack quickly and in
force’’, and were able to mobilise hundreds of thousands of soldiers (Hall
2000,p p . 15-18). The direct consequence of this speedy , comprehen-
sively organised, well equipped and thoroughly armed mass mobilisa-
tion was mass destruction on a scale not seen before in this part of the
world. The total casualties of the two Balkan wars amounted to over
150,000 people (Singer1972; Eckhardt 1988), the losing sides (Ottoman
in the ﬁrst and Bulgarian in the second) had substantial territorial losses
while the winners (Serbia, Greece, Montenegro and Romania) had, in
most instances, more than doubled their pre-war territories –i.e. Serbia
by 81 %, Greece by 64 %, Montenegro by 62 %( B i o n d i c h2011,p . 78).
This particular outcome shocked the political and cultural elites of
major European states. The highly violent struggle for territory which
was now justiﬁed in explicit nationalist terms reinforced the percep-
tion that the Balkan region is an eternal epicentre of aggressive
nationalism. This attitude was already present in the ﬁrst academic
analysis of the two Balkan wars with American scholar Jacob
Schurman ( 1914,p . 47) projecting war aims into the past: ‘‘For ages
the fatal vice of the Balkan nations has been the immoderate and
intolerant assertion by each of its own claim [for territory] coupled
with contemptuous disregard of the right of others’’. A very similar
attitude followed the just as devastating Greco-Turkish War (1919-22)
that ultimately helped entrench the perception of the region as
being characterised by incessant violence and xenophobic nationalist
aspirations.
5
5 It is no accident that the term ‘‘Balkan-
isation’’ was coined in the aftermath of the
1912-3 Balkan wars. The stereotypes of the
Balkans as an inherently violent region were
also reproduced in the Western literature of
that period as exempliﬁed by Agatha Christie’s
1925 mystery novel The Secret of Chimneys
where the ‘‘Balkan characters’’ are depicted as
bloodthirsty killers (‘‘I will slit his nose, and
cut off his ears, and put out his eyes’’) and the
region as inhabited by ‘brigands’ whose hob-
bies include ‘‘assassinating kings and having
revolutions’’ (Todorova 1997,p . 122).
38
sini/C20sa male /C20sevi/C19c
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003975612000021 Published online by Cambridge University PressNevertheless rather than being an omnipresent feature of Balkan
history this sudden eruption of organised violence was a completely
novel product of intensive 19th century state building, largely based on
Western European models. Unlike other parts of Europe before the
mid-19
th century the Balkan region did not have a history of large
scale protracted violent conﬂicts as its polities did not possess even
rudimentary organisational means to initiate and wage such conﬂicts.
The direct legacy of the Ottoman Empire was an almost non-existent
civil service, poor transport and communication networks, no signiﬁ-
cant urban centres, dispersed and haphazard power and military
structures, undeveloped banking and commerce, no proper legal system
or any signiﬁcant industry .
At the beginning of the 19
th century the new Balkan polities had
virtually no bureaucratic apparatus: in 1813 Serbia had only 24 civil
servants, the entire Dunabian Principalities (present day Romania)
less than 1,000 ofﬁce-holding boyars, whereas even as late as 1878 the
whole of Bosnia and Herzegovina was administered by only 120 civil
servants (Pavlowitch 1999,p . 31; Glenny 1999:268; Stokes 1976,p . 4).
In addition, no South East European polity had a national bank,
factory, railroad or town with more than 30,000 inhabitants until well
into the second half of the 19
th century. The mountainous terrain and
tiny network of paved roads (by the mid-19th century Greece had only
168 and Serbia just under 800 km) made transport extremely
cumbersome and slow (Roudometof 2001; Stoianovich 1994).
The lack of state development made violent conﬂict difﬁcult; the
Greek War of Independence ( 1821-9) and the two Serbian uprisings
(1804-13; 1815-7) were largely chaotic, highly contingent events
fought by disorganised and poorly armed units consisting of local
notables, foreign trained volunteers and banditry with no proper
military instruction (Glenny 1999; Meriage 1977). Such weak polities
could not ﬁght large scale protracted and destructive wars. Hence the
sporadic and disordered violence that characterised the conﬂicts of the
early 19
th century Balkans could not, and did not, create strong states.
Even in the case of the region’s most intense and lengthy war, the
Greek War of Independence, the war experience did not result in
substantially enhanced state capacity of the new Greek polity. Thus
the idea that warfare by itself can automatically create potent states has
to be questioned. Nevertheless although this particular outcome goes
against the general premise of the bellicose approach – as developed by
its forbearers such as Gumplowitz ( 1899)o rO p p e n h e i m e r(2007
[1926]) or some recent articulations (Gat 2006, Carneiro 1977), it does
39
wars, states, nations
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003975612000021 Published online by Cambridge University Pressnot falsify Tilly’s thesis completely as his argument emphasises that low
intensity warfare is less likely to increase the organisational capacity of
the state. The fact that the Greek War of Independence was militarily
and politically decided by the Great Powers, and that the conﬂict also
had all the hallmarks of a civil war, complicates this issue further.
A much better testing ground for the bellicose argument in general
and Tilly’s thesis in particular is the end of the 19
th and beginning of
the 20th century when one can observe a dramatic increase in the
development of the organisational and infrastructural powers of states
in the Balkans. Modelling their state apparatuses on the French,
Belgian and Prussian example, political elites in South East Europe
managed, in a very short time, to build potent state and war machines.
The size of the civil service changed beyond recognition: what started
off as a handful of administrators in the early 1800s grew to hundreds
of thousands by the end of that century. For example, even in1837 the
Serbian civil service consisted of less than 500 administrators while by
1902 over 22 % of all Belgrade households were inhabited by civil
servants and their families. The administrative apparatus in Greece
and Bulgaria underwent event greater transformation so that in less
than 20 years the Greek state administration grew by 43 % and by the
1930s civil servants and their families constituted more than 650,000
in each case which amounted to between a third and fourth of
the country’s entire urban population (Roudometof 2001,p p . 156;
Stoianovitch 1994). In a similar vein transport and communication
networks expanded dramatically withmuch better roads, railway systems,
and commercial shipping (i.e. Greece): between1885 and 1912 the total
length of railway lines increased by841 % in Bulgaria, 613 %i nG r e e c e
and 285 % in Serbia (Lampe and Jackson 1982,p . 211).
By the end of the 19
th century all governments in the region were
preoccupied with the greater centralisation of state power. To achieve
this objective their constitutional arrangements were modelled on the
highly centralised Prussian ( 1850), Belgian ( 1831) and French ( 1830)
constitutions (Pippidi 2010,p . 125). Furthermore, most states adopted
the hierarchical top down models of internal organisation often
imitating French-style district prefects and substantially enhancing
the position of the top administrators. The dominant view among the
political and cultural elites was that successful state building requires
excessive centralisation. As the one time Bulgarian minister of
education and Czech intellectual, Konstantin Josef Jire /C20cek, put it:
‘‘Bulgarian politicians wished to arrange an omnipotent state machine
on the French model, ruled by a centre with thousands of ofﬁcials paid
40
sini/C20sa male /C20sevi/C19c
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003975612000021 Published online by Cambridge University Pressby the state and depending on it and the political parties’’ (Bechev
2010,p . 142).
The administrative expansion was paralleled with the intensive
development of the military and police. Military budgets increased
substantially, together with the size of the armies and ofﬁcer corps.
For example, at the beginning of the 20
th century one third of
Bulgaria’s annual budget was allocated to the military, and other
states in the region had a very similar situation (Pelt 2010,p . 240).
The introduction of universal conscription meant that within two or
three decades the militaries of the Balkan states expanded consider-
ably: in 1903 the Serbian army was four times larger than it was ten
years earlier whereas the Greek ofﬁcer corps grew between 1872 and
1895 by a staggering 240 % (Roudometof 2001). The military build-up
was also accompanied by increasing investments in technology and
industry linked to weaponry and military logistics. Hence Romania’s
petrol production rose so much that by the late 1920s the country
became one of the leading petrol producers in the world and Serbia’s
industrial infrastructure at the same time was enlarged threefold
compared to what it was twenty years earlier (Pearton 1971; Vucinich
1968).
The ultimate result of this military, bureaucratic and state expan-
sion was the capability of mobilising large sectors of the population
and ﬁeld enormous armies in the two Balkan wars and World War1.I t
is these violent conﬂicts that brought about huge human casualties and
material destruction never seen before in this part of the world. Hence,
rather than representing an alleged continuity of violence supposedly
inherent in the region’s past, the proliferation of organised violence was
a completely novel phenomenon emerging as a direct consequence of
intensive modernisation and state building on Western European
models. In this context the Balkan wars of1912-3 were not a throwback
to the past but a distinctly modern phenomenon. The scale of violence
and destruction witnessed here was a sign of things to come, something
that the rest of Europe was to experience just one year later.
The ﬂeeting look at the two Balkan wars would suggest that their
experience is fully congruent with the bellicose argument and particu-
larly with Tilly’s point that mobilisation for war and protracted warfare
are likely to enhance the capacity of states: indeed what one can observe
here is the parallel development of state power, war preparations and
gradual paciﬁcation of domestic resistance. There is no disputing the
fact that late 19
th century Balkan polities were much more robust state
and war machines able to control resources, people and materiel, than
41
wars, states, nations
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003975612000021 Published online by Cambridge University Presstheir early 19th century predecessors. However, the complexity of the
Balkan case challenges the simple formula that war makes states and
states make war.
Firstly, it is not so apparent that warfare itself had so much impact
on the state building in the region as the period of most intensive state
expansion was generally characterised by prolonged peace. In fact, in
the second half of the 19
th century, a period when the Balkan countries
made most progress in enhancing the infrastructural powers of their
polities, the region was involved in only three small scale wars of very
short duration: the Serbo-Ottoman War ( 1876), the Serbo-Bulgarian
War (1885) and the Greco-Ottoman war ( 1897). It is difﬁcult to see
how these rather insigniﬁcant conﬂicts could have had a direct impact
on the dramatic intensiﬁcation of state building that took place in this
period. Moreover, large scale protracted conﬂicts such as the 1912-3
Balkan wars, World War 1 and the 1919-22 Greco-Turkish war all
came after the period of concentrated state development.
Secondly, and more importantly, the outcome of these major wars
provides a direct challenge to Tilly’s thesis. If the central argument is
that prolonged and successful war making leads not only to the
creation of strong and stable states but also developed civil societies,
parliamentarism and economic prosperity then the Balkan case shows
otherwise. The aftermath of all major wars fought in South East
Europe at the beginning of the 20
th century shows that regardless of
whether a particular state found itself on the winning or losing side
this made little or no difference to its post-war development. More
speciﬁcally although Greek, Montenegrin, Romanian and Serbian
states were clear winners of the 1912-3 Balkan wars as well as
WWI6 as
they acquired large new territories, population and resources, their
post-
WWI state development was almost identical to that of the states
that found themselves on the losing side: Bulgaria and Turkey . In other
words instead of further enhancing their state capacities, expanding
civil societies, parliamentarism and economic growth, the1920sa n d30s
were periods of economic stagnation, weakening state power, curtailing
of civil liberties and stiﬂing of parliamentary institutions which
eventually ended in rigid authoritarianism. The Balkan states became
heavily indebted and reliant on foreign capital and in this resembled
more the colonies of Imperial powers than the stable and strong
sovereign states (Biondich 2011; Mungiu-Pippidi 2010;M a n n2004).
6 The Greek case is more complex as the
state soon became involved in another large
scale conﬂict (the Greco-Turkish war of
1919-22) where it lost all its territorial gains
acquired during WWI.
42
sini/C20sa male /C20sevi/C19c
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003975612000021 Published online by Cambridge University PressTherefore the conventional bell icose approach seems unable to
explain these different trajectories in the relationship between war and
state-making in the Balkans. The key question here is: why have
intensive inter-state wars not created strong and vibrant polities in South
East Europe? To properly answer this question it is paramount to
explore the internal conﬁguration of societies in the Balkans and
especially the relationship between social stratiﬁcation, ideology and
warfare. As the conventional bellicose approach tends to overemphasise
external, geo-political and economic factors at the expense of internal and
speciﬁcally ideological sources of conﬂicts there is a need to go beyond
Tilly’s analysis. In particular the focus needs to move towards the role
ideologies, especially popular ideological doctrines such as nationalism,
and internal social divisions play in mediating the relationship between
state and organised violence. Much ofthe bellicose tradition of analysis,
and Tilly in particular, downplay the role of ideological power in
modernity (Male/C20sevi/C19c 2010,p . 79-84). Nevertheless to account for the
Balkan case it is crucial to take ideology and especially nationalism much
more seriously than the conventional bellicose tradition does.
Nationalism and State Formation in the Balkans:
Rehabilitating Modernism
Sharing the general view that human beings are essentially interest
driven, materialist creatures much of the conventional bellicose
historical sociology devotes little attention to the ideas, values and
corresponding practices espoused by the agents involved in various
social conﬂicts. Charles Tilly is no exception here as his approach
emphasises the role of material interests and political institutions at
the expense of collective meanings and individual perceptions. This is
particularly visible in his treatment of nationalist ideology which is
never a sui generis phenomenon but rather a weak, parasitic force
dependent on the actions of states and their rulers. As Brubaker (2010,
p. 380) rightly argues, Tilly’s understanding of nationalism is overly
state-centred, materialist and instrumentalist: ‘‘the theory addresses
the political form of nationalist claims-making while ignoring the
cultural content of nationalist sense-making’’. Hence, to explain
persistent state weakness in the wake of intensive inter-state wars in
the Balkans, my attention will shift to the role of ideology , and
nationalism in particular, and its link with social stratiﬁcation.
43
wars, states, nations
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003975612000021 Published online by Cambridge University PressIf we understand ideologies not as closed and inﬂexible belief systems
but as dynamic, changing, processes through which human beings make
sense of their everyday experiences, then the analysis of ideology is
a precondition for understanding large scale social processes such as war
and state-building. As political facts and social events cannot speak for
themselves but entail particular interpretation we inevitably rely on
different interpretative maps to understand social reality. In this sense
all human beings are ideological creatures (Male /C20sevi/C19c, 2010; 2006).
More speciﬁcally , as we live in a world where the principal unit of mass
social organisation is the nation-state, with much of everyday experience
articulated in nation-centric terms, it is crucial to understand how
nationalism came to be and was established as the dominant source of
state legitimacy in the modern world.
Seminal scholars of nationalism such as Gellner (1964; 1983; 1997),
Hobsbawmn ( 1990), Breuilly ( 1993) and Anderson ( 1983) among
others have emphasised the inherent contingency, relative historical
novelty and revolutionary character of nationalist ideology . Rather
than being a natural, normal, primeval and permanent form of collective
identity, national attachments are understood to be historically speciﬁc
and atypical, generated by the actions of distinct social organisations,
malleable and heavily dependent on on-going structural transformations
such as industrialisation, urbanisati on, or secularisation. For Gellner
nationalism could not emerge before modernity as pre-industrial
societies were rigidly hierarchical inan economic, political and cultural
sense. Instead of unifying rulers and their subjects in the pre-industrial
world, culture was used to reinforce social distinctions between the
aristocracy and top clergy on the one hand and the peasantry and urban
dwellers on the other. Hence for much of history the dominant socio-
political units were either much smaller ( i.e. city-states, principalities,
chiefdoms, etc.) or large r than the nation-state ( i.e. empires). Conse-
quently, instead of nationhood, one’s sense of identity tended to be
expressed in terms of locality ,religion, kinship or status.
Gellner ( 1997, 1988) makes a sharp distinction between the
agrarian and industrial age: the former is characterised by stringent
hierarchies, stagnation, sluggishness and stability where ‘people starve
according to rank’ and the latter is deﬁned by its vibrancy, dynamism,
social mobility, innovation and the striving towards continuous
economic and scientiﬁc growth. The system’s ingrained changeability,
the clearly articulated division of labour and the demand for constant
growth enhances the role of expert knowledge. Hence unlike Agraria
where work is essentially manual and discursive knowledge is ancillary
44
sini/C20sa male /C20sevi/C19c
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003975612000021 Published online by Cambridge University Pressif not completely irrelevant, Industria is dominated by semantic labour
where universal, context-free literacy becomes a norm. Moreover, as the
industrial world is dependent on both social and geographical mobility,
with large sectors of the population moving from the countryside to the
cities, there is an organisational need for greater linguistic uniformity.
Consequently, the proliferation of industrial development goes hand in
hand with the expansion of large scale educational systems which
ultimately turns a culturally diverse peasantry into a homogenous
nation. In other words, mass education does not just provide a skilled
workforce necessary for the perpetuation of its industrial base but more
signiﬁcantly it also forges strong national identities that could not exist
beforehand. In Gellner’s (1983,p . 36)o w nw o r d s :
The employability, dignity, security and self-respect of individuals, typically,
and for the majority of men now hinges on their education [ .] A man’s
education is by far his most precious investment, and in effect confers his
identity on him. Modern man is not loyal to a monarch or a land or a faith,
whatever he may say , but to a culture.
Therefore, rather than preceding modernity nationalism is a by-
product of industrialisation as it is only in the modern era that the
trans-class cultural homogeneity makes sociological sense. In the pre-
industrial era neither the peasantry nor the aristocracy could concep-
tualise the world in national terms: while the social universe of
illiterate peasants rarely expanded beyond one’s village, close kinship
or religious afﬁliation, the aristocrats and top clergy relied on culture
to reinforce the internal status divide. In contrast, modernity entails
a substantial degree of egalitarianism where commonly shared ‘‘high’’
national culture, inculcated through the educational system and other
state institutions, replaces the sea of vernacular, oral ‘‘low’’ cultures
and establishes itself as a principal source of political legitimacy.
Other leading scholars share many aspects of Gellner’s modernist
explanation while downplaying his economistic account. Instead they
argue that nationalism was an invention of political elites in times of
dramatic political and social changes (Hobsbawm 1990), or a by-
product of the development of the modern bureaucratic state (Mann
1993; Breuilly 1993), or a new form of collective imagination resulting
from the expansion of print-capitalism (Anderson 1983). This mod-
ernist paradigm, and especially Gellner’s theory, has provoked much
criticism. Some have singled out the rampant functionalism and
historical determinism that underpin the paradigm (Male /C20sevi/C19c 2007;
Mouzelis 2007; 1998; O’Leary1998); others have condemned cultural
essentialism, Eurocentric assumptions and a rather nostalgic view of
45
wars, states, nations
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003975612000021 Published online by Cambridge University Pressthe European empires (Eriksen 2007; Hann 2001; 1998). Nevertheless
the most critical are the ethno-symbolists, perennialists and ‘‘early
modernists’’ who insist on the substantial degree of continuity
between the pre-modern ethnies and modern nations and who also
emphasise the role emotions play in generating nationalist action
(Smith 2009, 1986; Hutchinson, 2007; Roshwald 2006; Gorski 2000;
Taylor 1998). In the eyes of these critics South East Europe stands out
as a clear historical case that refutes the key tenants of the modernist
paradigm and in particular Gellner’s theory . Hence Drakuli/C19c( 2008);
Canefe (2002); Minogue (1996); Kedourie (1985), Orridge (1981) and
Wilson ( 1970) argue that nationalism emerged in the Balkans long
before any visible signs of modernity or industrialisation. For example
Minogue ( 1996,p . 120) insists that ‘‘nationalism long precedes the
coming of industrialism, as in the case of Greek nationalism’’ whereas
Hupchick ( 2002,p . 187,p . 212) writes about the ‘‘national revolu-
tionary activity [ .] among the Serbs and the Greeks during the
opening decades of the nineteenth century’’ and a ‘‘sense of ethnic
group awareness, based on recognition of a common language and
shared history, [that] grew and spread among the various Balkan
populations (a process termed ‘‘national revival’’ [.]) so too did the
idea of group self-governance’’. In a similar way Wilson (1970,p . 28)
describes the First Serbian Uprising of 1804 as ‘‘the ﬁrst of the great
nationalistic movements of the nineteenth century’’.
The modernist response to these criticisms was either to soften
their concepts and explanatory claims, to look for exceptional histor-
ical conditions for the Balkans or to emphasise the indirect inﬂuence
of modernisation on the region. Thus Mouzelis ( 2007; 1998) and Hall
(2010) reformulate Gellner’s concept of industrialism as ‘‘modernity’’
which would then be able to encompass the advent of nationalism
in regions such as the Balkans, Latin America or Ireland where
industrialisation came much later. Gellner’s own defence of his theory
combined the idea of unique circumstances and indirect inﬂuence. He
saw the Balkan merchants and bandits as key generators of nationalist
doctrine: whereas the merchants were depicted as being affected by
western ideas through international trade, the religious difference of
the mostly Orthodox banditry vis- /C18a-vis their Muslim Ottoman rulers
led to their gradual transformation into nationalist rebels. As Gellner
(1997,p . 42) puts it:
Bandit-rebels in Balkan mountains, knowing themselves to be culturally distinct
from those they were ﬁghting, and moreover linked, by faith or loss-of-faith, to
a new uniquely powerful civilisation, thereby became ideological bandits: in
46
sini/C20sa male /C20sevi/C19c
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003975612000021 Published online by Cambridge University Pressother words, nationalists [ .] these rebels and their poets did absorb and
disseminate western ideas in the form in which Romanticism both inverted and
continued the Enlightenment.
As Hall ( 2010) and O’Leary ( 1998) rightly point out Gellner’s
defence of his argument is not only unconvincing but it is also based
on highly speculative assumptions which are extremely difﬁcult to
prove. This attempt at an ad hoc justiﬁcation weakens the central premise
of the theory . However, expanding Gellner’s concept of ‘‘industry’’ to
‘‘modernity’’ and searching for alternative signs of modernisation, other
than industrialism, in the Balkans has not proved to be a particularly
fruitful strategy . In this sense Gellner’s approach, as is the case for
other modernist theories of nationalism, seems unable to explain the
Balkan case. In other words, just as the conventional bellicose ap-
proaches could not make clear why intensive inter-state wars did not
produce strong states in the region so the modernist theories of
nationalism seem resigned to the view that the Balkans are a blind spot
for their approach. Nevertheless, similar to the ‘war makes states’
paradigm both the criticisms as well as the defences of the approach
have been focused on the wrong target. Rather than attempting to prove
the impossible – that industrialisation or modernisation were in some
form present in the early 19
th century Balkans – the emphasis should
move towards the question of whether the Balkan uprisings of the early
19th century and later had anything to do with nationalist ideology .
My argument is that even more so than organised violence,
nationalism was a latecomer to the region. More speciﬁcally in what
follows I demonstrate that nationalist goals and principles were a largely
insigniﬁcant source for social mobilisation not only among the majority
of the population but also among the political elites that were at the helm
of these early uprisings. Furthermore, I argue that even when the Balkan
states embarked on large scale protracted wars at the beginning of the
20
th century nationalism still remained an ideology that was not shared
by the majority of the Balkan populations. In other words, contrary to
popular perceptions the modernist theories can account for the Balkan
case quite well. However, as classical modernism, and Gellner’s model
in particular, do not devote enough attention to the complex relationship
between nationalism and social stratiﬁcation they need some revising
with a view to explaining the peculiarity of the Balkan case.
If one follows Gellner’s ( 1983,p . 1) well known deﬁnition of
nationalism as a theory of political legitimacy built on ‘‘a political
principle, which holds that the political and national unit should be
congruent’’ then the early19
th century uprisings in South East Europe
47
wars, states, nations
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003975612000021 Published online by Cambridge University Presscould not be described as nationalist even in a minimalist sense. One
of the important legacies of life under the Ottoman Empire was the
dominance of religion, kinship and status ranks over ‘‘ethnic’’ attach-
ments. The millet system fortiﬁed religious divisions and in this
process subdued any sense of articulated cultural difference. For
example the Rum millet included all Orthodox Christian populations
regardless of their ‘‘ethnic’’ origin and the vernacular languages spoken.
Since Greek became a lingua franca of the Rum millet, mastering the
language well and moving to the city usually meant becoming
a ‘‘Greek’’. In other words being a ‘‘Greek’’ was a status category ,
a mechanism for social mobility , that had neither ’ethnic’ nor political
meaning as an overwhelming majority of middle class Orthodox
Christians (‘‘Greeks’’) had no inclination towards forming an indepen-
dent Greek nation-state (Kitromilides 2010,R o u d o m e t o f f2001).
In this context the various Balkan uprisings of the early 19
th
century such as the First ( 1804-13) and Second Serbian Uprising
(1815-17), the Wallachian and Cretan insurrections of 1821 and the
Greek War of Independence were the result of internal turmoil within
the Ottoman empire, and to a lesser extent the geo-political pressures
of the Great Powers, rather than what they were seen to be in the West
– ‘‘the revolutions for national liberation’’. Not only did mass partici-
pants of these uprisings have no sense of what the sovereign nation
means but even the political leadership of these movements had no
ambition to establish independent nation-states. All these uprisings,
including the Greek War of Independence, were chaotic, highly contin-
gent events comprising elements of social discontent, fear, opportunism
and necessity where nationalist principles were virtually nonexistent.
T h eﬁ r s tt w os i g n i ﬁ c a n tr e b e l l i o n so ft h ee a r l y19
th century , the two
Serbian uprisings of 1804 and 1815, were profoundly contingent
historical events which were neith er inspired nor undertaken in the
name of sovereign nationhood. The principal leaders of the rebellions,
/C228orCeP e t r o v i/C19c-KaraCorCe and Milo/C20sO b r e n o v i/C19c, were opportune trad-
ers who quickly realized that the social frustrations of local peasantry
could be channeled in a direction that would beneﬁt their personal
inﬂuence and ultimately help their ambition to establish a monopoly on
pork trade with the Habsburg Empire (Meriage 1977;P a x t o n1972).
7
7 Both Kara CorCe and Obrenovi /C19c were
wealthy peasant pig dealers who made for-
tunes by exporting pigs to the Habsburg
Empire. Once Obrenovi/C19c established his rule
in Serbia his monopoly on pig trade made
him one of the richest men in Europe: ‘‘Milo/C20s
was to accumulate, by his abdication in 1839,
a capital worth 1,078,000 golden sovereigns,
53 % cash and 47 % in perianal and real
property’’ (Pavlowitch 1981,p . 148).
48
sini/C20sa male /C20sevi/C19c
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003975612000021 Published online by Cambridge University PressBoth leaders were illiterate, their lifestyle and system of rule was
modeled on the Ottoman example and instead of demanding indepen-
dence for Serbia they were engaged in internal Ottoman conﬂict
vouching ‘to restore the order on behalf of the Sultan’ and remove the
disloyal and undisciplined ayans and janissaries (Roudometoff 2001,
p. 231;D j o r d j e v i/C19c and Fischer-Galati 1981;P a v l o w i t c h1981). As there
were no discernible intellectuals on the territories of Ottoman Serbia
8 at
this time the support for the upris ings came from the cultural and
religious elites based in the Habsburg Empire. However even these
individuals, such as the leader of the Habsburg Serbian Orthodox
population, Stevan Stratimirovi /C19c of Karlovac, did not envisage the
formation of an independent Serbian state for the Serbian nation but
instead advocated the establishment of a Slavic Orthodox Empire ‘‘ruled
by a Russian grand duke’’ (Meriage 1977,p . 189). Hence, neither
political, cultural nor economic elites had any inclination towards national
self-determination whereas the majority of, the essentially peasant,
population had no understanding of what a nation was (Stokes 1976).
While there is no doubt that in ‘‘the Greek War of Independence’’ the
ideas and principles of national sovereignty were more present than in
the Serbian (or later Bulgarian) case, the driving force of the conﬂict had
very little to do with nationalism. Despite the later, nationalist, re-
interpretation of the events leadingto this war and the war itself as being
motivated by the clearly deﬁned goals of ‘‘national liberation’ this is far
from the truth.
Not only were most senior Orthodox clergy , wealthy merchant
families and the Ottoman Christian administrators not particularly
interested in the demise of the Ottoman system under which they
largely prospered as the leaders of churches, trade, banking, admin-
istration and foreign policy, but the Phanariot and Boyar (Christian)
families were often the pillars of this very system enjoying various
privileges and large scale estates. Hence the outbreak of conﬂict, later
dubbed the ‘‘Greek War of Independence’’, was essentially a power
struggle between the two camps of Christian elites. The uprising
started not in Greece but in the Dunabian Principalities (later day
Romania) and it consisted of a chaotic and messy series of events
involving prolonged internal rivalry initially between Boyars and
8 Early 19th century Serbia was character-
ised by rampant illiteracy including the over-
whelming majority of the Orthodox priests.
It is only with the establishment of political
autonomy that ﬁrst fully literate professionals
were present on Serbia’s territory. Those
included Serbian speaking teachers and ad-
ministrators imported from the Habsburg
Empire (Stoianovich 1994).
49
wars, states, nations
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003975612000021 Published online by Cambridge University PressPhanariots and later between different sections of very diverse ‘‘Greek
society’’ with the ﬁnal outcome decided exclusively by the direct
involvement of Britain, France and Russia (Glenny 1999; Mazower
2000). The attempt to trace a direct link between these unpredictable
and chaotic events with the activities of small secret societies, such as
Filiki Eteria, the Philorthodox Organisation, or the Big Brotherhood,
based outside of the Greek territories which allegedly had devised
plans for the establishment of Greek nation-state, are completely
unfounded. The prominent members of these societies advocated
different and often mutually exclusive visions of cultural, religious or
social renewal with the focus on the restoration of the Byzantine
Empire rather than pursuing the goal of an independent Greek polity
(Kitromilides 1994; Roudometoff 2001).
Traditional historiography has made much of the role played by the
social bandits (hajduks, hajduts, uskoks, khlepts, and kac¸aks) in the early
19
th century Balkan uprisings, depicting them as guerillas ﬁghting for
the national cause. Nevertheless most were completely ignorant of the
nationalist aspirations, were often simple opportunists willing to
switch sides and prey on both the Muslim and Christian peasantry
(Pelt 2010,p . 224; Pavlowitch 1999, Glenny 1999). The idea of shared
national heritage and history meant next to nothing for most khlepts,
hajduks and kac¸aks. A ﬂattering comparison made by a foreign visitor
comparing a klepht leader Nikotsaras and the ancient Greek hero
Achilles provoked an outburst of anger in Nikotsaras: ‘‘What rubbish
are you talking about? Who is this Achilles?’’ (Kakridis,1963,p . 252).
Since the overwhelming majority of the population in South East
Europe at that time were peasants whose sense of belonging oscillated
between local (kinship, village) and religious attachments (Orthodox
Christianity) there was no room for comprehending the world in
national terms. To enhance their support in the uprisings the leaders
had to rely on clan and family name recognition, religiously inspired
prophecies that linked the collapse of the Ottoman Empire to the
Second Coming of Christ and ‘‘the authority of the Orthodox [Russian]
tsar [.] and on loyalty towards the sultan’’. However, in most instances,
coercion was the decisive source for mobilization. For example KaraCorCe
‘‘threatened to burn villages of those who did not appear [on the
battleﬁeld] [.] or to decapitate Serbs [Christians] who helped Turks
[Muslims]’’ (Stokes1976,p . 83). Therefore the Balkan case does not
falsify the modernist accounts of nationalism as there was no nationalism
in the Balkans before industrialization or modernity . Not only were the
majority of the population oblivious to nationalist ideology but so were,
50
sini/C20sa male /C20sevi/C19c
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003975612000021 Published online by Cambridge University Pressfor the most part, the leaders of the early19th century uprisings in South
East Europe. Furthermore Gellner’s emphasis on literacy and the role of
educational institutions in forging viable national identities ﬁnds much
support in the post-independence period.
Although the second half of the 19
th century saw the new Balkan
states invest heavily in building large scale nation-state centric state
apparatuses it took a long time to create a literate and schooled
citizenry . For example as late as 1864 the literacy rate in Serbia was
only 4.2 % while by 1884 there were just 4.5 % literate men and 1.5 %
women in Bulgaria. Greece was in a slightly better position but the
population was still overwhelmingly illiterate: in 1840 only 12.5 %
men and 6.3 % women had basic literacy skills (Ekme /C20ci/C19c 1991;
Roudometoff 2001). The ﬁrst primary Bulgarian and Montenegrin
schools were opened in 1835 and 1934 respectively whereas the
Albanian speaking population did not have a single primary school
until 1887 (Biondich 2011, Lederer 1969).
As, before independence, the Orthodox Church was a most signif-
icant institution of what Gellner (1983) would call ‘‘exo-socialisation’’,
it is interesting to brieﬂy explore its relationship with nationalist
ideology . Although after independence the autocephalous Orthodox
Churches had become the beacons of ethno-nationalisms during
Ottoman rule they were generally opposed to ideas and principles of
national sovereignty . The Orthodox patriarchs, bishops and other
senior clergymen enjoyed a privileged position within the Ottoman’s
millet structure and were certain that independence would open the
door for the potential proselytism of the Roman Catholic and Protes-
tant churches. Furthermore the church establishment was particularly
hostile to the Enlightenment and Romanticism inspired secularism,
liberalism and republicanism that underpinned the nascent nationalist
movements, and sternly resisted any initiatives that promoted the ideas
and practices associated with the pre-Byzantine (i.e. pagan) traditions.
Hence the Greek Orthodox Church opposed the standardization of
Greek vernacular on its ancient model. The Patriarch Gregory V’s
encyclical on education ( 1819) strongly condemned the practice of
naming children after ancient Greek heroes and denounced even
rudimentary attempts to propagate republican and nationalist ideas
describing them as ‘‘the plots of the devil that often masquerade behind
the clamoring for liberty and equality’ (Kitromilides2010,p . 38).
While the senior clergy was actively hostile to nationalism the
ordinary priests were largely ignorant of nationalist ideology. As they
were hardly distinct from other peasants nearly all regular priests were
51
wars, states, nations
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003975612000021 Published online by Cambridge University Pressilliterate, lacked even basic knowledge of the Bible, were not able to
deliver sermons and were prone to combine Christian and pagan
traditions. For example ‘‘Serbian clergymen were almost identical to
other peasants. They were farmers and herdsmen. The only difference
was their clothes and beards’’ (Radi/C19c 2003,p . 158). In this sense, just
as with the population at large, the local priests could not conceptu-
alize the world in nation (ist) terms. It is important to emphasize that
despite Orthodox Christianity being an important source of collective
identiﬁcation and probably the only pre-modern mechanism for exo-
socialisation, the Church’s institutional inﬂuence was very weak.
Throughout the Balkans church attendance was low and sporadic,
confessions and communions were rare and the religious focus was on
‘‘sin and preservation of one’s honor and moral purity’’ and worship-
ing individual saints rather than on following Christian teachings and
observing Church practices (Foli /C19c 2001). Hence before independence
and the development of state apparatuses no social institution, in-
cluding the Church, was able to signiﬁcantly penetrate the microcosm
of local, kinship and village based traditions. Simply put, there was no
institutional and organizational space for nationalism in the pre-
independence and early post-independence Balkans.
It is the intensive state building that took off in the second half of
the 19
th and early 20th century that had direct impact on the presence
of nationalist discourses. In other words rather than being a cause of
state formation, nationalism was an outcome of state building as all
Balkan governments started investing much energy and resources in
what Mosse (1991) would call ‘‘nationalization of the masses’’. Hence
the expansion of education coupled with ever increasing literacy rates
became a crucial vehicle for state sponsored inculcation of nationalist
ideologies. Thus, for example the newly formed state intellectuals in
Serbia were commissioned to write textbooks and other literature
which depicted Serbs as the ‘ﬁrst and oldest people in Europe’ who
have ‘‘founded Belgrade several thousand years before Christ’’
(Milojevi/C19c 1871,p . 74). They also insisted that the Serbian people
were very numerous in the past, have ‘inhabited three continents,
Asia, Africa and Europe long before Christ’ and that all the peoples in
the entire pre-Ottoman Balkans ‘‘spoke old Serbian language’’
(Petkovi/C19c 1926,p . 57; Gop /C20cevi/C19c 1889,p . 12). Similarly , the Greek
and Bulgarian authorities ﬁnanced publications of books, plays,
paintings and musical creations that either traced the origins of their
nations far into the past or simply gloriﬁed the ‘‘national genius’’ of
Greeks and Bulgarians respectively. So Constantine Paparrigopoulos’s
52
sini/C20sa male /C20sevi/C19c
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003975612000021 Published online by Cambridge University Press‘‘The History of the Greek Nation’’ (1865-74), which insists on the
uninterrupted continuity between ancient and present-day Greeks,
was ﬁnanced by the Greek government, was quickly instituted as the
ofﬁcial account of national origin and is still used in schools and
colleges all over Greece (Roudometoff 2001,p p .107-10). In addition
to the military , bureaucracy and police, national(ist) education
became a budgetary priority. Thus Bulgaria’s budget for education
expanded from 1.5 %i n 1879 to 11.2 %i n 1911, and it grew by
a staggering 650 % in just over a 20 years period (Pippidi 2010,p . 128;
Biondich 2011,p . 54). The lavish, state sponsored, institutions of
‘‘high’’ culture such as national academies and learned societies,
universities, theaters, opera houses, museums and concert halls were
set up in all capitals and some provincial cities throughout Southeast
Europe. The Balkan governments provided ﬁnancial support for
newspapers and other mass media so that by the early 20
th century
a large number of nationalist newspapers were in circulation. For
example, by the late 1920s and early 1930s Yugoslavia had 50 major
daily papers (Case 2010,p . 294). The Balkan states also supported
irredentist movements in the neighboring countries and attempted to
project their geo-political ambitions, such as the visions of Greater
Greece (Megali Idea ), Greater Serbia ( Na/C20certanije, Homogena Srbija)
and Greater Bulgaria ( Velika i obedinena Bulgarija ), into educational
and artistic institutions.
Nevertheless despite the unprecedented nationalist propaganda
penetrating all state apparatuses, and especially education, mass media
and even civil society, nationalism remained an ideology of the elite
minority, largely not shared by the rural population and urban
laborers until well into the 20
th century . As the intensive state building
of the second half of the 19th century clearly privileged civil servants,
the police and military establishment, state intellectuals and top
business people it is only this social strata that became fully loyal to
the new states and espoused ﬁerce nationalist, irredentist and expan-
sionist ideas. On the other side were those that did not beneﬁt from
state development: the peasantry, manual workers, and a tiny sector of
the lower middle classes. Regardless of the fact that upon indepen-
dence in both Serbia and Bulgaria most peasants become de jure small
land holders while in Greece they found themselves de facto in such
a position,
9 this did not substantially improve their economic or
9 Although from 1832 land in Greece was
in state ownership, farmers have taken over
most of this land without any interference
from the state authorities (M ouzelis 1978 ).
53
wars, states, nations
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003975612000021 Published online by Cambridge University Presspolitical position. However as the administrative, military and other
state sector increased dramatically in a very short period of time it was
the rural population, and to a lesser extent the small but rising urban
proletariat, that had to provide resources to maintain such a gigantic
state apparatus. The new states demanded cash taxation and this
forced farmers to enter the market and seek credit, usually at quite
unfavorable rates. Such a policy provoked deep animosity towards
the city and its most recognizable representatives – civil servants. The
peasant demonstrations and occasional jacqueries expressed this in
slogans such as: ‘‘Allkaputa/C20si [wearers of city coats; townsfolk] should
be killed’’ (Biondich 2011,p . 60). In other words the swift, state
imposed modernization and industrialization created a sharp class
polarization with on the one hand an urban, state created strata,
favoring further state expansion both externally and internally, and on
the other hand, mostly rural (and some urban) producers, favoring
state transformation or attenuation of state power. These different
structural positions fostered development of different ideological
orientations: whereas the state bureaucracy , police, military establish-
ment and the state intellectuals supported /C19etatisme and nationalism,
both of which were seen as the principal source of state legitimacy, the
peasantry and urban poor were more sympathetic to religious
conservatism, peasant populism and anti-statism (Pippidi 2010;
Stojanovi/C19c 2003; Milosavljevi/C19c 2003; Roudometof 2001).
Therefore, despite their palpable visibility Balkan nationalisms of
the late 19
th and early 20th century were neither very deep nor
extensively widespread. Most peasants opposed irredentist adventures,
wars of territorial expansion and urban uprisings (i.e. the Serbo-Ottoman
war of 1875, the April Uprising of 1876, the Serbo-Bulgarian war of
1885) and were often coerced to economically and politically support
the war effort (Biondich 2011; Pippidi 2010). Furthermore to make the
rural population more receptive to nationalism the state authorities
relied on anti-Semitism, xenophobia and the scapegoating of religious
and ethnic minorities. In this sense, rather than being a spontaneous
expression of ‘‘age old’’ animosities and hatred, a great deal of violence
was deliberately orchestrated from the top to engineer a sense of inter-
ethnic fear and ultimately to provoke internal (national) cohesion. For
example, in the run-up to the Balkan wars the Greek, Serbian and
Bulgarian ofﬁcers and soldiers were dispatched to Macedonia to
ferment inter-ethnic hostilities, and were dressed up as the indigenous
brigands ‘‘in order to conceal what was essentially state-sponsored
violence’’ (Biondich 2011,p . 71). Similarly the state intelligentsia,
54
sini/C20sa male /C20sevi/C19c
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003975612000021 Published online by Cambridge University Pressgovernment ministers and state sponsored education and mass media
were often the principal vehicles of anti-Semitism, Islamophobia and
hatred against other minorities in Romania, Bulgaria, Greece and
Serbia (Case 2010;R o u d o m e t o f2001;M a z o w e r2000).
Although by the beginning of the Balkan wars of 1912-3 and World
War 1, nationalist ideologies had penetrated greater sectors of the
population and wars had helped foster a degree of inter-group
cohesion even then a majority of the population in South East Europe
was not fully ‘nationalized’ and most peasants and urban laborers
remained skeptical if not completely opposed to these wars. For
example when the Greek activist persistently insisted on ﬁnding out
whether the local peasantry of Salonika see themselves as Greeks or
Bulgarians the peasants did not understand the question: ‘‘whenever I
asked them what they were – Romaioi [i.e. Greeks] or Voulgaroi
[Bulgarians], they stared at me incomprehendingly [ .] Well, we’re
Christians – what do you mean, Romaioi or Vulgaroi?’’ (Mazower
2000,p . 50).
As Boindich ( 2011,p . 43) points out ‘in the period between 1878
and 1923, when the Balkans experienced some of its worst political
violence, the bulk of the population, the peasantry , still lacked a strong
national consciousness’. Most peasant recruits were unwilling to ﬁght,
were inclined to desert or avoid conscription and were not particularly
enthusiastic about the territorial expansion of their states. As well
documented by Leon Trotsky’s 1912-3 Balkan war correspondence,
Serbian peasant conscripts were apathetic and inimical to war efforts
and nationalist projects. He characterized them as ‘‘depressed and
extremely homesick for their villages’’ (Trotsky 1980 [1913], p. 121).
Hence South East Europe is not a blind spot for the modernist
theories of nationalism. Not only was there no nationalism in the
Balkans before modernization and industrialization, but nationalist
ideology, even more so than organized violence and warfare, came very
late to this part of the world. However, modernism requires some ﬁne
tuning to account for the often inversely proportional relationship
between social stratiﬁcation and nationalism. While most modernist
theories see nationalism as the decisive social cement that binds diverse
citizenry into stable and cohesive societies able to generate economic
growth and social development, the Balkan experience indicates an
alternative trajectory . The 19
th and early 20th century history of the
region shows how , rather than acting as a cohesive social force,
nationalisms in South East Europe were often a source of internal
discord: the state supported irredentism and the pursuit of territorial
55
wars, states, nations
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003975612000021 Published online by Cambridge University Pressexpansion were regularly perceived as the ideological projects of the city
elite which could only , and usually did, bring misery to the country
side. Hence, instead of generating greater social unity and solidarity and
thus potentially stimulating social development the state enforced
attempts at nationalist mobilization tended to further polarize already
extremely divided societies (Male/C20sevi/C19c 2006, 2011).
Making Wars, States and Nations in the Balkans
There is a widespread view of the Balkans as the region which for
most of its history was brim-full of protracted violence and nationalist
euphoria. From the early 19
th century ‘national’ uprisings to the1990s
wars of Yugoslav secession, South East Europe has been seen as
a ‘‘powder keg of Europe’’ (Kaplan1994). Moreover, both nationalism
and violence are regularly singled out as the most important impedi-
ments for the social development of the region. Nevertheless, a careful
historical sociological analysis shows that neither of these two
common perceptions holds up well to empirical scrutiny. Instead of
being an inherent feature of the Balkan landscape, both nationalism
and organised violence are, historically speaking, fairly recent arrivals
to the region. In a similar vein, it is not the abundance of nationalisms
and wars than have stiﬂed the development of the region but in fact it
was often the lack of their organised prevalence that hampered wider
social advance. The fact that much of the warfare in the Balkans was
small scale, sporadic, and disorganised meant that such wars could not
help enhance the organisational capacities of states in the region.
Likewise the uneven, narrow , belated, and rigid, top down spread of
the nationalist ideology often mitigated against the development
of internal social cohesion, thus preventing the emergence of a degree
of social consensus necessary for economic and political development.
Nonetheless, this is not to say that war-making by itself inevitably
generates strong states and societies, or that the proliferation of
nationalism automatically leads to societal wellbeing and economic
prosperity.
The view of conventional bellicose historical sociology that pro-
tracted warfare is likely to eventually yield infrastructurally strong,
centralised states capable of creating political stability, social order,
and economic growth, requires major amending. Although the in-
stitution of the state might have originated in warfare, its viability and
56
sini/C20sa male /C20sevi/C19c
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003975612000021 Published online by Cambridge University Pressexpansion requires much more than sustained violence. Not all wars
make states and even those that make states do not necessarily create
strong polities. As Tallet ( 1992,p . 198) points out, Tilly’s account
suffers from the chicken and egg symptom. It is not clear what comes
ﬁrst: ‘‘whether an efﬁcient and developed bureaucracy was the pre-
condition for the growth in size and complexity of the armies [ .]o r
whether growth in armies stimulated growth in the bureaucratic
structures of the state’’. Thus warfare is better understood as a test
of state strength rather than as an impetus for state formation. Balkan
warfare clearly demonstrates the complexity of this relationship. Wars
did not create independent polities in the early 19
th century Balkans.
Instead independence was a highly contingent event resulting from
the combination of the internal organisational structures of the
weakened Ottoman Empire and the geo-political interests of the Great
Powers.
10 Similarly, as they were small scale events in the mid to late
19th century , wars did not forge strong states either. The beginning of
the 20th century saw South East Europe becoming an epicentre of
mass scale warfare but much of the intensive state building took place
long before the 1912-13 Balkan wars and World War 1. While the
mobilisation for warfare certainly played a part in the centralisation of
state power and the expansion of the state’s infrastructural and
bureaucratic capacities, the outcomes of these high intensity wars
were not strong states and vibrant civil societies. Instead both the
victorious and the defeated Balkan states shared almost an identical
developmental trajectory in the 1920s and 1930s: authoritarian rule,
stiﬂing of parliamentarism and civil society, huge indebtedness to
international creditors, state monopolies in the economy, rampant
nepotism and corruption, heightened class polarisation and perpetual
animosity between the urban and rural population.
To fully understand this particular outcome, which in many
respects contradicts the central thesis of the conventional bellicose
approach, it is crucial to focus on the role of nationalism and social
stratiﬁcation in the Balkan societies. In contrast to normative views
that see rampant nationalist attachments as an obstacle for social
progress, historical and sociological reality indicates that the degree of
national solidarity is often a precondition for effective political and
10 As Biondich ( 2011,p . 41) puts it suc-
cinctly: ‘‘Serbia’s autonomous status was
achieved largely through Russian Diplomacy
(1817, 1829), Greek independence ( 1830)
through Anglo-French-Russian intervention,
and Bulgarian autonomy through direct
Russian military intervention followed by
Great Power diplomatic ﬁat ( 1878)’’.
57
wars, states, nations
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003975612000021 Published online by Cambridge University Presseconomic development. The modernist paradigm in the study of
nationalism, and Gellner’s work (1997,p . 25; 1964,p . 114) especially,
argue that not only are nationalism and economic growth fully
compatible but, as the two are the main sources of political legitimacy
in the modern/industrial era, they entail each other. Furthermore, and
in contrast to the primordialist and perennialist accounts, the mod-
ernists rightly insist on the historical novelty of this synergetic
relationship between nationalism and socio-economic development.
The Balkan experience fully vindicates both of these claims.
Firstly, contrary to the primordial and perennial interpretations,
the early 19
th century uprisings in South East Europe had nothing to
do with nationalism but were a direct by-product of imperial geo-
politics and internal weaknesses of the Ottoman social order. Rather
than being a motivational source of state-building, nationalist ideology
was a consequence of state formation. Nevertheless, even after decades
of intensive, state sponsored ‘‘nationalisation of the masses’’, this
ideology remained a profoundly weak force unable to motivate the
majority of Balkan populations until well into the 20
th century.
Secondly the corollary of the state’s inability to swiftly turn
peasants into Serbs, Greeks, Bulgarians or Albanians was a lack of
internal consensus on developmental goals and ambitions. As nation-
alism did not penetrate most layers of Balkan societies there was no
adequate social glue to provide a shared vision of national solidarity
necessary for radical economic, political and social reforms. This
Gellnerian account of the relationship between nationalism and social
progress requires an analytical extension to capture the internal
dynamics of South East European societies where, rather than being
a device of social cohesion, nationalism was often a source of deep
class friction.
Therefore, the popular image of the Balkan Peninsula as a historical
hub of aggressive nationalisms and perpetual violence, both of which
allegedly thwarted its progress, is really an inverted, image of the
historical reality. It is actually the absence of protracted organised
violence and society-wide nationalisms that have heavily contributed
to the often sluggish development of the region.
58
sini/C20sa male /C20sevi/C19c
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003975612000021 Published online by Cambridge University PressBIBLIOGRAPHY
Anderson Benedict, 1983. Imagined Commu-
nities (London, Verso).
Ayoob Mohammed, 1995. The Third World
Security Predicament: State Making, Re-
gional Politics and the International System
(Boulder, Lynne Rienner).
Barnett Michael N., 1992. Confronting the
Costs of War: Military Power, State and
Society in Egypt and Israel (Princeton,
Princeton University Press).
Bechev Dimitar, 2010. ‘‘The State and Local
Authorities in the Balkans, 1804-1939’’,
in Van Meurs Wim and Alina M ungiu-
Pippidi,e d s . , Ottomans into Europeans
(London, Hurst).
Beissinger Mark, 1998. ‘‘Nationalisms that
Bark and Nationalisms that Bite: Ernest
Gellner and the Substantiation of Na-
tions’’,in Hall John A., ed., The State of
the Nation: Ernest Gellner and the Theory
of Nationalism (Cambridge, Cambridge
University Press).
Berend Ivan T., 2003. History Derailed:
Central and Eastern Europe in the Long
Nineteenth Century (Berkley, University
of California Press).
Biondich Mark, 2011. The Balkans:
Revolution, War and Political Violence since
1878 (Oxford, Oxford University Press).
Breuilly John, 1993. Nationalism and the
State (Manchester, Manchester University
Press).
Brubaker Rogers, 2010. ‘‘Charles Tilly as
a Theorist of Nationalism’’,The American
Sociologist
, 41,p p .375-381.
Canefe Nergis, 2002. ‘‘Turkish Nationalism
and Ethno-Symbolic Analysis: The Rules
of Exception’’Nations and Nationalism , 8
(2), pp. 133-155.
Carneiro Robert, 1977. A Theory of the
Origin of the State.Studies in Social Theory,
3 (1), pp. 3-21.
Case Holly, 2010. ‘‘The Media and State
Power in South-East Europe to 1945’’,
T ABLE
List of 19th and early 20th century Balkan Wars and Major Uprisings
1. First Serbian Uprising ( 1804-13)
2. Second Serbian Uprising ( 1815-7)
3. Greek War of Independence ( 1821-9)
4. Wallachian Uprisings ( 1821 and 1848)
5. Cretan Insurrections ( 1821-4)
6. Ottoman-Montenegrin Conﬂicts (1852-3 and 1858-9)
7. Herzegovinian Rebellion ( 1875)
8. Bulgarian (April) Uprising ( 1876)
9. Serbo-Ottoman War ( 1876)
10. Serbo-Bulgarian War ( 1885)
11. Greco-Ottoman War ( 1897)
12. Romanian Peasants’ Revolt (1907)
13. First Balkan War ( 1912-3)
14. Second Balkan War ( 1913)
15. Greco-Turkish War ( 1919-22)
59
wars, states, nations
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003975612000021 Published online by Cambridge University Pressin Van Meurs Wim and Alina M ungiu-
Pippidi,e d s . , Ottomans into Europeans
(London, Hurst).
Centeno Miguel A., 2002. Blood and Debt:
War and the Nation-State in Latin America
(University Park, Penn State University
Press).
Clodfelter Michael, 1992. Warfare and
Armed Conflicts: A Statistical Reference ,
Vol. I (Jefferson, McFarland and Company).
Cviji/C19c Jovan, 1922. Balkansko poluostrvo
i Juznoslovenske Zemlje: Osnove antropo-
geografije (Belgrade, Zavod za izdavanje
ud/C20zbenika).
Djordjevi/C19c Dmitrije and Stephen F isher-
Galati, 1981. The Balkan Revolutionary
Tradition (New York, Columbia Univer-
sity Press).
Downing Brian M., 1992. The Military Rev-
olution and Political Change (Princeton,
Princeton University Press).
Drakuli/C19c Slobodan, 2008. ‘‘Whence nation-
alism?’’,Nations and Nationalism , 14 (2),
pp. 221-239.
Dvornikovi/C19c Vladimir, 1939. Karakterologija
Jugoslovena (Belgrade, Kosmos).
Eckhardt William,
1992. Civilizations, Em-
pires and Wars: A Quantitative History of
War (Jefferson, McFarland).
—, 1988. ‘‘Wars and Related Deaths, 1700-
1987’’, in Sivarded Leger Ruth, World
Military and Social Expenditures. 1987-88
(Washington, World Priorities).
Ekme/C20ci/C19c Milorad, 1991. ‘‘The Emergence of
St. Vitus Day as the Principal National
Holiday of the Serbs’’,in VucinichWayne S.
and Thomas A. Emmert,e d s . ,Kosovo: Leg-
acy of Medieval Battle (Minneapolis, Uni-
versity of Minnesota Press).
EP - Evening Post , LXVI (16), 18 July 1903.
Eriksen Thomas H., 2007. ‘‘Ernest Gellner
and the Multicultural Mess’’,in Male/C20sevi/C19c
Sini/C20sa and Mark H augaard,e d s . ,Ernest
Gellner and Contemporary Social Thought
(Cambridge, Cambridge University Press).
Ertman Thomas, 1997. Birth of the Leviathan
(Cambridge, Cambridge University Press).
Fine John V .A., 1994. The Late Medieval
Balkans (Ann Arbor, University of
Michigan Press).
Foli/C19c Zvezdan, 2001. Vjerske zajednice u
Crnoj Gori 1918
-1953: Prilozi za istoriju
(Podgorica, Istorijski institut Crne Gore).
Gat Azar, 2006. War in Human Civilization
(Oxford, Oxford University Press).
Gellner Ernest, 1964. Thought and Change
(London, Weidenfeld and Nicolson).
—, 1983. Nations and Nationalism (Oxford,
Blackwell).
—, 1988. Plough, Sword and Book: The
Structure of Human History (London,
Collins Harvill).
—, 1997. Nationalism (London, Phoenix).
Gerolymatos Andre, 2002. The Balkan Wars
(Staplehurst, Spellmount).
Glenny Misha, 1999. The Balkans 1804-
1999: Nationalism, War and the Great
Powers (London, Granta).
Gopcevic Spiridon, 1889. Makedonija: Et-
nografski odnosi Makedonije i Stare Srbije
(Belgrade, Parna /C20stamparija Dim).
Gorski Philip S., 2000. ‘‘The Mosaic Mo-
ment: An Early Modernist Critique of
Modernist Theories of Nationalism’’,
American Journal of Sociology , 105 (5),
pp. 1428-1468.
Gumplowicz Ludwig, 1899. The Outlines of
Sociology (Philadelphia, American Acad-
emy of Political and Social Science).
Hall John A., 2010. Ernest Gellner: An In-
tellectual Biography (London, Verso).
Hall
Richard C., 2000. The Balkan Wars
1912-1913: Prelude to the First World War
(London, Routledge).
Hann Chris, 2001. ‘‘Gellner’s Structural-
Functional-Culturalism’’,Czech Sociologi-
cal Review, 9 (2), pp. 173-182.
—, 1998. ‘‘Nationalism and Civil Society in
Central Europe: From Ruritania to the
Carpathian Euroregion’’,in Hall John A.,
ed., The State of the Nation: Ernest
Gellner and the Theory of Nationalism
(Cambridge, Cambridge University
Press).
Herbst Jeffrey, 2000. States and Power in
Africa: Comparative Lessons in Authority
and Control (Princeton, Princeton Univer-
sity Press).
Hintze Otto, 1975 [1908]. The Historical
Essays of Otto Hintze (New York, Oxford
University Press).
Hobsbawmn Eric J., 1990. Nations and
Nationalism since 1780 (Cambridge,
Cambridge University Press).
Hupchick Denis P .,2002. The Balkans: From
Constantinople to Communism (New York,
Palgrave).
Hutchinson John 2007. ‘‘Warfare, remem-
brance and national identity’’, in Leoussi
Athena S. and Steven G rosby,e d s . ,Na-
tionalism and Ethnosymbolism: History ,
Culture and Ethnicity in the Formation of
Nations. (Edinburgh, Edinburgh Univer-
sity Press).
60
sini/C20sa male /C20sevi/C19c
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003975612000021 Published online by Cambridge University PressKakridis John Th., 1963. ‘‘The Ancient
Greeks of the War of Independence’’,
Journal of Balkan Studies, 4 (2), pp.251-264.
Kaldor Mary, 2001. New and Old Wars:
Organised Violence in a Global Era
(Cambridge, Polity Press).
Kaplan Robert D. 1994. The Balkan Ghosts:
A Journey through History (New York,
Viking).
Kedourie Elie, 1985. Nationalism (London,
Hutchinson).
Keen Maurice, 1999. Medieval Warfare:
a History (Oxford, Oxford University
Press).
Kennan George F .,1993. The Other Balkan
Wars. A 1913 Endowment Inquiry in Retro-
spect with a New Introduction and Reflections
on the Present Conflict (Washington, Carne-
gie Endowment for International Peace).
Kitromilides Paschalis, 2010. ‘‘The Orthodox
Church in Modern State Formation in
South-East Europe’’in W. Van Meurs and
A. M ungiu-Pippidi,e d s . , Ottomans into
Europeans: State and Institution Building in
South Eastern Europe (London, Hurst).
—, 1994. Enlightenment, Nationalism,
Orthodoxy: Studies in the Culture and
Political Thought of South-Eastern Europe
(Brookfield, Variorum).
Lampe John R. and Marvin R. Jackson, 1982.
Balkan Economic History , 1550-
1950
(Bloomington, University of Indiana Press).
Leander Anna, 2004. ‘‘War and the Un-
making of States: Taking Tilly Seriously
in the Contemporary World’’, in Guzzini
Stefano and Dietrich J ung,e d s . ,Contem-
porary Security Analysis and Copenhagen
Peace Research (London, Routledge).
Lederer Ivo J., 1969. ‘‘Nationalism and the
Yugoslavs’’ in Sugar Peter and Ivo J.
Lederer,e d s . , Nationalism in Eastern
Europe (Seattle, University of Washington
Press).
Lustick Ian S., 1997. ‘‘The Absence of Mid-
dle Eastern Great Powers: ‘Backwardness’
in Historical Perspective’’, International
Organization, 51,p p .653-683.
Male/C20sevi/C19c Sini/C20sa, 2006. Identity as Ideology:
Understanding Ethnicity and Nationalism
(New York, Palgrave).
—, 2007. ‘‘Between the Book and the New
Sword: Gellner, Violence and Ideology’’,
in Male/C20sevi/C19c Sini/C20sa and Mark H augaard,
eds., Ernest Gellner and Contemporary So-
cial Thought (Cambridge, Cambridge Uni-
versity Press).
—, 2010. The Sociology of War and Violence
(Cambridge, Cambridge University Press).
—, 2011. ‘‘Nationalism, War and Social
Cohesion’’, Ethnic and Racial Studies ,
34 (1), pp. 142
-161.
Mann Michael, 1993. The Sources of Social
Power II (Cambridge, Cambridge Univer-
sity Press).
—, 2004. Fascists (Cambridge, Cambridge
University Press).
Mazower Mark, 2000. The Balkans: From
the End of Byzantium to the Present Day
(London, Phoenix).
Meriage Lawrence P ., 1977. ‘‘The First
Serbian Uprising 1804-1813; National Re-
vival or a Search for Regional Security’’,
Canadian Review of Studies in Nationalism ,
4 (2), pp. 187-205.
Milojevi/C19c Milos S., 1871. Putopis dela
(prave) Stare Srbije (Belgrade, Dr /C20zavna
/C20stamparija).
Milosavljevi/C19c Olivera, 2003. ‘‘Elitizam u
narodnom ruhu’’,in Perovi/C19c Latinka, ed.,
Srbija u modernizacijskim procesima 19.i
20. Veka: Uloga elita (Belgrade, Cigoj
/C20stampa).
Minogue Kenneth, 1996. ‘‘Ernest Gellner
and the dangers of theorising nationalism’’,
in Hall John A. and lan J arvie, The Social
Philosophy of Ernest Gellner (Amsterdam,
Rodopi).
Mosse George L., 1991. The Nationalization
of the Masses: Political Symbolism and
Mass Movements in Germany from the
Napoleonic Wars through the Third Reich
(Ithaca, Cornell University Press).
Mouzelis Nicos, 1978. Modern Greece: Facets
of Underdevelopment (London, Mcmillan).
—, 1998. ‘‘Ernest Gellner’s Theory of Na-
tionalism: Some Definitional and Method-
ological Issues’’, in Hall J.A., ed., The
State of the Nation: Ernest Gellner and
the Theory of Nationalism (Cambridge,
Cambridge University Press).
—, 2007. ‘‘Nationalism: Reconstructing
Gellner’s Theory’’, in Male/C20sevi/C19c Sini/C20sa
and Mark H augaard,e d s . , Ernest
Gellner and Contemporary Social Thought
(Cambridge, Cambridge University
Press).
Mungiu-Pippidi Alina, 2010. ‘‘Failed Institu-
tional Transfer? Constraints on the Polit-
ical Modernization of the Balkans’’,in Van
Meurs Wim and Alina M ungiu-Pippidi,
eds., Ottomans into Europeans (London,
Hurst).
61
wars, states, nations
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003975612000021 Published online by Cambridge University PressNicholson Helen, 2004. Medieval warfare:
theory and practice of war in Europe, 300-
1500 (New York, Plagrave).
O’Leary Brendan, 1998. ‘‘Ernest Gellner’s
Diagnoses of Nationalism’’,in Hall John A.,
ed., The State of the Nation: Ernest Gellner
and the Theory of Nationalism (Cambridge,
Cambridge University Press).
Oppenheimer Franz, 2007 [1926]. The State
(Montreal, Black Rose Books).
Orridge Andrew, 1981. ‘‘Uneven Develop-
ment and Nationalism II’’,Political Stud-
ies 29 (2), pp. 181-90.
Pavlowitch Stevan K., 1981. ‘‘Society in
Serbia 1791-1830’’, in Clogg Richard,
ed., Balkan Society in the Age of Greek
Independence (London, Macmillan).
—, 1999. A History of the Balkans 1804-1945
(London, Longman).
Paxton Roger V ., 1972. ‘‘Nationalism and
Revolution: A Re-examination of the Ori-
gins of the First Serbian Insurrection,
1804-1807’’,East European Quarterly , 6
(3), pp. 337-362.
Pearton
Maurice 1971 Oil and the Romanian
state (Oxford, Clarendon Press).
Pelt Mogens, 2010. ‘‘Organised Violence in
the Service of Nation Building’’, in Van
Meurs Wim and Alina M ungiu-Pippidi,
eds., Ottomans into Europeans (London,
Hurst).
Petkovi/C19c Zˇivko D., 1926. Prve pojave srpskog
imena (Belgrade, Izdanje Vladimira
Markovi/C19ca).
Pippidi Alina, 2010. ‘‘The Development of an
Administrative Class in South-East Europe’’,
in Van Meurs Wim and Alina M ungiu-
Pippidi,e d s . , Ottomans into Europeans
(London, Hurst).
Radi/C19c Radmila, 2003. ‘‘Verska elita i mod-
ernizacija: Teskoce pronalazenja odgo-
vora’’in Perovi/C19c Latinka, ed., Srbija u
modernizacijskim procesima 19.i 20. Veka:
Uloga elita (Belgrade, Cigoj /C20stampa).
Ratzenhofer Gustav , 1881. Die Staatswehr
(Stuttgart, Cottasche Buchhandlung).
Reno William, 2003. ‘‘The Changing Nature
of Warfare and Absence of State Building
in West Africa’’, in Davis Diane E. and
Anthony W . Pereira,e d s . ,Irregular Armed
Forces and Their Role in Politics and State
Formation (Cambridge, Cambridge Uni-
versity Press).
Roshwald Aviel, 2006. The Endurance of
Nationalism (Cambridge, Cambridge Uni-
versity Press).
Roudometof Victor, 2001. Nationalism,
Globalization and Orthodoxy: The Social
Origins of Ethnic Conflict in the Balkans
(Westport, Greenwood Press).
R€ustow Alexander, 1980 [1950]. Freedom and
Domination (Princeton, Princeton Univer-
sity Press).
Singer Joel D., 1972. The Wages of War.
1816-1965 (Stockholm, Stockholm Inter-
national Peace Research Institute).
Schurman Jacob G., 1914. The Balkan Wars
1912-1913 (Princeton, Princeton Univer-
sity Press).
Smith Anthony D., 2009. Ethno-Symbolism
and Nationalism: A Cultural Approach
(London, Routledge).
Stoianovich Traian, 1994. Balkan Worlds:
The First and Last Europe (New York,
M.E. Sharpe).
Stojanovi/C19c D. 2003. Percepcija ideala slo-
bode, jednakosti I bratstva kod srpske elite
pocetkom 20. veka’’, in Perovi/C19c Latinka,
ed., Srbija u modernizacijskim procesima 19.
i 20. Veka: Uloga elita (Belgrade, Cigoj
/C20stampa).
Stokes Gale, 1976. ‘‘The Absence of Nation-
alism in Serbian Politics before 1840’’,
Canadian Review of Studies in Nationalism ,
4 (1), pp. 77-90.
Tallett Frank, 1992. War and Society in
Early Modern Europe, 1495-1715
(New York, Routledge).
Taylor Brian D. and Roxana B otea, 2008.
‘‘Tilly Tally: War-Making and State-
Making in the Contemporary Third
World’’,International Studies Review , 10,
pp. 27-56.
Taylor Charles, 1998. ‘‘Nationalism and
Modernity’’,in Hall John A., ed., The
State of the Nation: Ernest Gellner and
the Theory of Nationalism (Cambridge,
Cambridge University Press).
Thies Cameron G., 2007. ‘‘The Political
Economy of State Building in Sub-
Saharan Africa’’, Journal of Politics , 69,
pp. 716-731.
Tilly Charles, ed., 1975. The Formation
of National States in Western Europe
(Princeton, Princeton University Press).
—, 1985. ‘‘War Making and State making as
Organized Crime’’ in Evans Peter B.,
Dietrich R ueschemeyer and Theda S koc-
pol
,e d s . , Bringing the State Back In
(Cambridge, Cambridge University Press).
—, 1992. Coercion, Capital and European
States (Oxford, Blackwell).
62
sini/C20sa male /C20sevi/C19c
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003975612000021 Published online by Cambridge University PressTin-Bor Hui Victoria, 2005. War and State
Formation in Ancient China and Early
Modern Europe (Cambridge, Cambridge
University Press).
Todorova Maria N., 1997. Imagining the
Balkans (Oxford, Oxford University Press).
Trotsky Leon, 1980 [1913] The war corre-
spondence of Leon Trotsky , the Balkan wars
1912-13 (New York, Pathfinder Press).
Vucinich Wayne S., 1968. Serbia between
East and West: The Events of 1903-1908
(New York, AMS Press).
Ward Lester F ., 1913. Dynamic Sociology
(New York, Appleton).
Wilson Duncan, 1970. The Life and Times
of Vuk Stefanovi /C19c Karadzi /C19c, 1787-1864;
Literacy , Literature and National Indepen-
dence in Serbia (Oxford, Clarendon Press).
Woodhouse Christopher M. 1969. The Phil-
hellens (London, Hodder and Stoughton).
Zarinebaf Fariba, John B ennet and Jack L.
Davies, 2005. A Historical and Economic
Geography of Ottoman Greece (Princeton,
American School of Classical Studies).
R/C19esum/C19e
Depuis le d/C19ebut du XIXe si/C18ecle, dire ‘‘Balkans’’
renvoie /C18a nationalisme agressif et violence
debrid/C19ee, deux ph/C19enom/C18enes traditionnellement
t e n u sp o u ro b s t a c l e sm a j e u r sa ud/C19eveloppement
social. Tout/C18a l’oppos/C19e, l’argument pr/C19esent/C19ei c i
veut que l’absence de conflit arm/C19ep r o l o n g/C19ee t
de doctrines nationalistes charpent /C19ees mar-
quent la particularit/C19ed el ’ h i s t o i r ed el ’ E u r o p e
du Sud. L’article offre un examen critique
de la sociologie historique des guerres et des
th/C19eories modernes du nationalisme telles que
d/C19evelopp/C19ees notamment par Charles Tilly et
Ernst Gellner. Critique envers la sociologie
historique de la guerre et les th/C19eories modernes
du nationalisme, la lec¸on s’impose : ce n’est pas
l’exacerbation du nationalisme et de la violence
organis/C19ee mais bien plut^ot leur d/C19eficience his-
torique qui se r /C19ev/C18ele d /C19ecisive pour rendre
compte de la lenteur du d /C19eveloppement des
soci/C19et/C19es balkaniques.
Mots cl /C19es: Nation ; Nationalisme ; /C19Etats ;
Guerre ; Balkans.
Zusammenfassung
Seit Beginn des 19. Jahrhunderts steht der
Balkan Pate f€ur einen agressiven Nationalismus
und z €ugellose Gewalt, zwei Ph €anomene, die
traditionnell zu den Haupthinderungsgr€unden
f€ur eine soziale Entwicklung gez €ahlt werden.
Der vorliegende Beitrag widerspricht dieser
Auffassung, mit Hinweis auf die Abwesenheit
eines langen bewaffneten Konflikts und ko-
herenter nationaler Doktrinen, ein Spezifikum
der Geschichte S€ud-Ost-Europas. Die kritische
Hinterfragung der historischen Kriegssoziolo-
gie und der modernen Nationalismustheorien
erfolgt unter Einbeziehung der Arbeiten von
Charles Tilly und Ernst Gellner. Der Artikel
n i m m tk r i t i s c hB e z u ga u fA n s€atze der histor-
ischen Kriegssoziologie sowie auf modernisti-
sche Nationalismustheorien um zu zeigen, dass
nicht ein €Ubermaß an Nationalismus und
organisierter Gewalt sondern deren historischer
Mangel entscheidend war f €ur das verz €ogerte
Tempo der gesellschaftlichen Entwicklung in
den Balkanstaaten.
Schlagw€orter: Nation; Nationalismus; Staaten;
Krieg; Balkan.
63
wars, states, nations
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003975612000021 Published online by Cambridge University Press